---
layout: post
title: "1989 Ford F150 Guide "
date: 2021-12-31
excerpt: "After being introduced in 1948, the trucks offered by Ford became a serious market competitor. The 1980s was a major shift in truck following"
tags: [cars, trucks, ford, f150, guide , uglystance]
---
After being introduced in 1948, the trucks offered by Ford became a serious market competitor. The 1980s was a major shift in truck following. Ford capitalized on this trend with its F-series trucks. The F-150, being one of their most sought-after models, also became the highest bread earner for Ford's truck lineup.

The Ford F150 1989 model falls in the eighth generation of the F-series lineup. Being an eighth-generation model, it is quite clear that the people loved the F-series. It plays out heavily in favor of Ford's reputation for building exceptional quality trucks. The generations Ford introduced for Ford F150 are still around on the roads.

With this intro, one may start to think about the availability of parts for the Ford F150 1989 model. The good news is that although one might not run into OEM parts that frequently, the aftermarket parts are still around. The parts manufactured by aftermarket manufacturers have gained quite a bit in quality as well.

Let us look at the details pertinent to the Ford F150's 1989 model specifically to see how it will play out for a prospective buyer or owner of one.

## 1989 Ford F150 Specs

### 1989 Ford F150 Variants/Trim Levels

The 1989 Ford F150 was available in various trim levels. A standard differentiation was the short bed and long bed for the Ford F150 1989. All models available in 1988 were carried forward in both the short and long bed body styles. These were:

* Custom
* XL
* XLT Lariat

These were offered in Standard and SuperCab body styles. All variants of the F150 were offered with Styleside beds. Unlike the dual setup on the Ford F350 model, these came with a single rear wheel.

### Engine Options

The year 1989 saw the elimination of carbureted engines since all engines offered for Ford F150 were fuel-injected. The engine lineup wasn't changed much apart from eliminating carburetion systems in favor of fuel injection. The engine configurations remained somewhat similar to previous models.

It was offered as standard with the 4.9-liter inline six-cylinder engine with multi-port fuel injection. It produced 150 horsepower and 260 lb-ft of torque. The second member of the engine family was a 5.0-liter V8 producing 185 horsepower with 270 lb-ft of torque. Finally, there was a 5.8-liter option producing 210 horsepower and 	315 lb-ft of torque.
In addition to petrol engines, there were two diesel variants as well that didn't make their way to the F150. They were dedicated to the F250, F350, and Super Duty models. The petrol variants standardized the "HO" engine that was a part of the seventh generation of F150 trucks.

### Transmission Options

In 1989 the Ford F150 saw a driver-friendly upgrade from the previous models. Instead of the 3-speed manual transmissions, the 1989 models came with 5-speed manual transmissions. In addition to the fuel injection, this change maintained the fuel economy while offering better power figures.

In addition to the manual variant, it also came with a 4-speed automatic transmission called E40D. The elimination of the 3-speed manual transmission was also well received by the buyers.

### Drivetrain Options

The Ford F150 1989 was a light-duty truck that became very popular among buyers. It was offered with a 2WD system as standard, just like its previous variants. It was also offered with a 4WD option depending on the buyer's choice.

## 1989 Ford F150 MPG

The Ford F150 1989 was offered with various engine sizes with both manual and automatic transmissions. Both factors play out in the fuel economy of the Ford F150. Because of the higher displacement, the Ford F150 was a gas guzzler. But replacing the 3-speed manual with the 5-speed manual was a good move. How good, let's see.

**1989 Ford F150 trim levels** | **MPG City/Highway**
4.9-liter I6 Manual Transmission | 14/17
4.9-liter I6 Automatic Transmission | 13/15
5.0-liter V8 Manual Transmission | 12/16
5.0-liter V8 Automatic Transmission | 12/14
5.8-liter V8 Automatic Transmission | 10/12

The most fuel-efficient variant of the Ford F150 lineup was the 4.9-liter manual transmission. It achieved 14 MPG in the city and 17 on the highway. It was a pretty bad fuel economy figure but part of the whole Ford F150 package. People still loved these and didn't bother much about fuel economy.

## 1989 Ford F150 Prices

Finding a vehicle from the year 1989 is in itself a pretty daunting task. Finding a clean truck is even tougher. You may be able to find one of these in a decent condition starting from $ 4500.00 upwards. The extremely well taken care of ones can be found for as high as $30,000 or more with very low mileage.

A golden rule here is to always check for the condition and title of the car. We have observed quite a few of these trucks on Carsforsale.com, and some of these are in an absolutely pristine condition where the sellers are asking for huge sums of money for one of these. Here is a link if you would like to take a look.

We have established a list of items one needs to check while buying a used car. These are:

* Mileage - low mileage cars are usually priced higher
* Condition - always look for signs of rust and corrosion
* Tires - tires tell the condition of the vehicle along with the suspension
* Trim Level - trim levels can also play a part in deciding the price of used cars
* Aftermarket parts - availability of parts and their prices
* Seller - how well has the seller kept the vehicle
* Vehicle maintenance record - in case this is available, it can help a lot

In short, there are plenty of factors to consider while buying used cars. One should always go with open eyes since these factors can take you into the grey area where coming up with a good negotiation price figure becomes difficult.

## 1989 Ford F150 Accessories

### 1989 Ford F150 Bumper

The 1989 Ford F150 is a pretty old model. Finding OEM parts isn't short of a nightmare in this case. The best option, in this case, can be buying aftermarket parts for the Ford F150 since that will be much easier and economical. Over the more than two decades of existence, OEM parts are hardly seen anywhere apart from used ones.

We have tried looking for bumpers for the Ford F150 1989 on eBay in case any used options were available. Sadly we report, this isn't the case. You may be able to find the mounting kits for the bumpers, but the OEM bumpers are kind of depleted from the market. Here is a link in case you want to check.

The good news here is that Amazon.com has plenty of aftermarket accessory makers who offer bumpers for the Ford F150 1989. We have seen some options on Amazon.com from as low as $ 380.00 each. Here is a link in case you would like to buy these.

### 1989 Ford F150 Camping

Camping happens to be very popular among various recreational activities. Most camping enthusiasts carry their luggage on their trucks. The Ford F150 1989 can be a great companion if you love camping. It can be a great camping companion, given its towing and weight carrying potential.

We always advise that you get familiarised with the camping environment as a first step. It will help you greatly decide what you need to carry with you while you are getting ready. The Ford F150 1989 has been very popular among people who love camping. They can just get their stuff ready, put it on their Ford F150 and be on their way.

There are a lot of camping accessories that can prove helpful when you are on your camping trip. Although the OEM camping gear for the Ford F150 1989 might be tough to get a hold of, there are many aftermarket options available. These can range widely from camping tents, camping chairs to other camping-related stuff.

These can be easily found on Amazon.com at reasonable prices. Here is a link if you are interested.

### 1989 Ford F150 Roof rack

Roof racks serve various duties. These can be used as additional storage accessories and help you as tying support for your luggage or camps. The amount of stuff to carry on a camping trip can be a lot. Sometimes the available space in your vehicle might not be enough for your camping needs, and this is where roof racks can be of great help.

Once you are aware of the camping site, it is a good idea to prepare well. A roof rack can be of great help in this situation. We have seen on Amazon.com that a lot of aftermarket options are available for Ford F150 1989 trucks. This is a link to Amazon, where you can go if you want to buy a roof rack or learn more about them.

## Best 1989 Ford F150 Replacement Parts

When one is the owner of a truck as old as Ford F150 1989, being worried about the availability of parts is fairly natural. Obviously, the OEM parts for the Ford F150 1989 truck aren't going to be easy to find. Some parts may be available in used condition for ebay.com or other online marketplaces.

But there are a lot of aftermarket manufacturers that are still offering parts and accessories for the Ford F150 1989. On Amazon.com, there is a long list of parts available from different aftermarket manufacturers for the Ford F150 1989. These can range from small items to large items. Here is a link if you like to buy one of these.

### 1989 Ford F150 Tires

he Ford F150 1989 comes with a tire size of 235/75-15 as standard. It is true for both the 2WD and 4WD variants. Finding tires for the Ford F150 1989 would heavily depend on the environment you drive your vehicle the most. In case you are in cold regions, the winters tires will work great. Then there are all-season tires also available for the Ford F150 1989.

We have seen Tirerack.com, which has all the tires available for the Ford F150 1989. These start at $ 97.99 and go all the way to $ 189.81 for the most expensive option. These can be viewed at this link if you are looking to buy these.

### 1989 Ford F150 Air filters

The air filters act as a shield for preventing dust from entering the combustion system. The air filters need a timely replacement for the car's engine to perform at its best. If not done at due time, one may run into different issues. These can be:

* Reduced fuel efficiency
* Less smooth ride
* Rough idling

In a nutshell, the air filter has to be changed or cleaned during periodic checks. It is also reflected in the maintenance schedule of the Ford F150 1989.

OEM air filters for Ford F150 1989 can be a hassle to find, but the aftermarket options are still available. That too at very reasonable prices. On Amazon.com, these are available in plenty. Here is a link in case you are looking for one.

### 1989 Ford F150 Headlights

The headlights of any car take quite a beating due to weather exposure. A very typical issue is the fading of the outer surface of headlights. It significantly reduces visibility in evening or night driving. The solution could either have the headlights cleaned or replaced.

On Amazon.com, you can find headlight restoration kits that will help you save quite a bit of money. These are mostly DIY-type products with which you can revive the outer surface of the car's headlights. Here is a link to some of these.

In case you don't want to go through this DIY hassle and want a new headlight, there is a fair chance you might be able to find some OEM-style lights as well, in addition to aftermarket options. Here is the link for an aftermarket headlight for Ford F150 1989 with DRLs. And here is the link for the OEM style headlights from another aftermarket manufacturer.

### 1989 Ford F150 Brake pads

The brake pads for SUVs and trucks weigh heavily on the use of the vehicle. If the vehicle is used for towing and off-roading, it causes the brake pads to wear out faster. Similarly, if the vehicle is kept mostly on the road, the brake pads can last longer. It is always a good idea to keep the brake pads in check regularly.

If the brake force feels reduced, it is time to change the brake pads. Another indication of worn-out brakes is squeaking sounds at the time of brake application. OEM brake pads for the Ford F150 1989 would be hard to find, but the aftermarket ones are not. Amazon.com has plenty of these. Here is a link in case you are looking for these.

## 1989 Ford F150 Mods

For Ford F150 1989, some loyal owners have kept their trucks alive to this day. They go for all sorts of different mods to personalize their trucks. We will look at some of these mods that would work well on the 1989 Ford F150 trucks.

### 1989 Ford F150 Lift Kits

A frequent mod that truck owners go after is lifting their vehicle's ride height. This can be achieved with various tricks and modifications, one of which is a lift kit. The lift kits are essentially spacers that can allow an increase of 1 to 2.5 inches in the ride height of the vehicle. This mod gives your truck an upright stance and an aggressive look.

There are certain benefits one may gain by installing a lift kit. The first benefit is a ride height increase. It also allows for the installation of bigger tires. In a way, the lift kit helps with a ride height increase manifold.

Rough Country is a well-reputed brand in this market. They sell their lift kits on Amazon.com for the Ford F150 1989 model. They start at around $700.00 and work well on your trucks. Here is a link to learn more or buy.

## 1989 Ford F150 Maintenance Schedule

When a vehicle is bought, it also demands periodic maintenance. If not cared for, the vehicle's lifespan gets reduced substantially. The usual maintenance of your vehicle can make it last longer. It holds true for both newly bought vehicles as well as old ones. A check becomes necessary after every few thousand miles.

For the Ford F150 1989, which is more than 30 years old, greater care is needed. It makes the process of maintaining your truck somewhat cumbersome but is still essential. It is a prerequisite if you want to avoid being stuck without help.

Let us look at some of the things that necessitate periodic checks. These usually include brakes, fluids, and some other things related to your vehicle's electronics. Once again, if taken good care of, there is no reason your vehicle won't last long.

### 1989 Ford F150

**Every 3000 miles Replace:**
Engine Oil
Oil Filters
Fuel Injection system cleaning

Inspect:
Tires
Tire alignment
Wheels
Cooling System
All fluids
Brakes

**Every 7500 miles**

Replace:
Engine Oil
Oil Filters
Brake pads if necessary

Inspect:
Tires
Tire alignment
Wheels
Cooling System
All fluids
Brakes
Battery
Suspension

**Every 15000 miles**

Replace
Brake Rotors
Brake pads if necessary
Cleaning Fuel Pumps
Throttle body cleaning

Inspect
Tires
Tire alignment
Spark plugs
Cooling system
All fluids
Suspension

**Every 60000 miles**

Replace:
Transmission oil
Brake Pads
Brake Fluids
Rear-axle oil
Spark Plugs

Inspect:
Overall inspection

## 1989 Ford F150 Recalls

Like other vehicles, the Ford F150 1989 was also subject to some issues. These caused Ford to plan recalls for vehicles that could be fixed. Let us take a look at these.

### 1989 Ford F150 Ignition Switch Recall

This recall was initiated in 1988 and also affected the Ford F150 for the 1989 model year. The issue caused parked Ford vehicles to catch fire after an internal short circuit at the ignition switch. Ford was forced to recall an unknown number of vehicles affected by this.

Ford engaged its engineers to redesign the ignition switch to avoid fire mishaps. The newly designed ignition switches were installed free of cost on all the vehicles using the old ignition switches. It is the only major recall that Ford initiated to help the F150 1989 owners.
1989 Ford F150 Common Problems
The Ford F150 was also known for some common problems. It wasn't something huge. And people still loved the F150 trucks despite these issues. Let us discuss those briefly.

### 1989 Ford F150 Loose Steering
It was a standard-issue across all F-series trucks and not F150 in particular. The loose steering issue caused all sorts of handling issues, and this can be seen on a lot of forums online as well. F150 1989 owners struggled to fix this issue by consulting other owners.

It was, however, only repairable by replacing the column with a new one. Some owners did get their steering columns replaced and reported that the issue was gone after that.

## 1989 Ford F150 Resale Value
The resale value is either a major or minor concern for different owners. Some people pay particular attention to resale value, and rightfully so. When one wants to upgrade from a current vehicle to a newer one, it makes perfect sense to worry about resale. The depreciation is what kills the resale by a mile.

For the Ford F150 1989, the resale value can be of concern sometimes. There are vehicles in bad to moderate condition that can be bought and sold for less than seven grand. But then some well-maintained ones go as high as 20 grand or more. On Carsforsale.com, these range from $4500 to $20,000 or more. 

## 1989 Ford F150 Competitors
The Ford F150 1989 was up against some competitive competitor products. Other brands like Dodge, GM, Chevy were also trying for a bite of the trucks market. The Ford F150 1989 was a compact truck, and other companies were also offering products in this market. 

Some of its prominent competitors were:

* Chevrolet C-Series pickup trucks
* Dodge RAM D-series pickup trucks

The American truck manufacturers had a tough time beating Ford in the mid-size trucks market. Although Ford was struggling to recover from financial troubles, the F150 was selling very well. The market's inclinations towards the Ford F150 made it a huge success over its competition.

## 1989 Ford F150 FAQs

What is the annual maintenance for Ford F150 1989?
According to Repairpal.com, the Ford F150 1989 costs $ 775.00 to maintain annually. It is a bit towards the higher side. We also have to factor in discussing a 30 plus-year-old truck. But then again, the fun factor of owning a classic and age can play a vital role in deciding the maintenance expenses.

### Which Ford F150 1989 Engine was the best?
The Ford F150 1989 was offered with three engine sizes. The 4.9-liter variant was the least powerful but was fuel-efficient. The 5.8-liter variant was powerful but was gas-hungry. The factor that decides which engine is the best is the owner's preference. Some drivers prefer power over gas efficiency, and some think otherwise.

It all boils down to what the vehicle owner wants to obtain. We suggest that the engine preference heavily depends on the buyer's decision. A well-maintained engine is what we suggest. The rest is up to you.

### Can we still find OEM parts for the Ford F150 1989?
It is a very salty topic to comment about. The age of the Ford F150 1989 makes it somewhat difficult to run into OEM parts. There are sellers on eBay with some of the OEM parts lying here and there. Those can still be bought from the eBay marketplace. But this is a pretty rare scenario.

What we suggest is not to remain restricted to OEM parts search. There are plenty of aftermarket sellers of Ford F150 1989's parts and accessories. These can be bought from either your local auto parts store or online. Amazon.com has plenty of aftermarket parts and accessories for the Ford F150 1989 model. We suggest you go for aftermarket options.

## Final Thoughts
The 1980s was not a good decade for Ford in terms of finances. The company was struggling to stay afloat, and with a 3 billion dollars R&D budget, it didn't seem impossible. The market was also getting flooded with various options making survival a challenge. It didn't stop Ford from offering what would later be called the best-selling truck.

The Ford F150 1989 was yet another milestone that Ford achieved with immense R&D. Some of the competitors also enjoyed the market share. But their following pales in comparison to that of the Ford F150. The Ford F150 1989 sold more than three hundred thousand of these.

Given the base price of $12,293.00, this means a minimum of 3.6 billion dollars in revenue by the F150 alone. That's saying something. Now you can find these ranging from $4500 to $20,000 depending on condition. The OEM parts for these trucks are also a non-issue. 

So we say go for it. If you have been planning on buying one, simply go for it. You are not going to regret owning one of these. A great truck that ruled its day is how we can sum this whole review up. Happy Reading. 


